
That discovery enabled mankind, three
hundred years ago, to formulate a general
theory of the Library and thereby satisfactorily
solve the riddle that no conjecture had been
able to divine—the formless and chaotic nature
of virtually all books. One book, which my
father once saw in a hexagon in circuit 15-94,
consisted of the letters M C V perversely
repeated from the first line to the last. Another
(much consulted in this zone) is a mere
labyrinth of letters whose penultimate page
contains the phrase O Time thy pyramids. This
much is known: For every rational line or
forthright statement there are leagues of
senseless cacophony, verbal nonsense, and
incoherency. (I know of one semi-barbarous
zone whose librarians repudiate the "vain and
superstitious habit" of trying to find sense in
books, equating such a quest with attempting to
find meaning in dreams or in the chaotic lines
of the palm of one's hand.... They will
acknowledge that the inventors of writing
imitated the twenty-five natural symbols, but
contend that that adoption was fortuitous,
coincidental, and that books in themselves have
no meaning. That argument, as we shall see, is
not entirely fallacious.)
For many years it was believed that those
impenetrable books were in ancient or fardistant languages. It is true that the most
ancient peoples, the first librarians, employed a
language quite different from the one we speak
today; it is true that a few miles to the right, our
language devolves into dialect and that ninety
floors above, it becomes incomprehensible. All
of that, I repeat, is true—but four hundred ten
pages of unvarying M C V's cannot belong to
any language, however dialectal or primitive it
may be. Some have suggested that each letter
influences the next, and that the value of M C V
on page 71, line 3, is not the value of the same
series on another line of another page, but that
vague thesis has not met with any great
acceptance. Others have mentioned the
possibility of codes; that conjecture has been
universally accepted, though not in the sense in
which its originators formulated it.
Some five hundred years ago, the chief of one
of the upper hexagons2 [
2 In earlier times, there
was one man for every three hexagons. Suicide
and diseases of the lung have played havoc with
that proportion. An unspeakably melancholy
memory: I have sometimes traveled for nights
on end, down corridors and polished staircases,
without coming across a single librarian.] came
across a book as jumbled as all the others, but
containing almost two pages of homogeneous
lines.
He showed his find to a traveling decipherer,
who told him that the lines were written in
Portuguese; others said it was Yiddish. Within
the century experts had determined what the
language actually was: a Samoyed-Lithuanian
dialect of Guaraní, with inflections from
classical Arabic. The content was also
determined: the rudiments of combinatory
analysis, illustrated with examples of endlessly
repeating variations. Those examples allowed a
librarian of genius to discover the fundamental 
law of the Library.
This philosopher observed that all books,
however different from one another they might
be, consist of identical elements: the space, the
period, the comma, and the twenty-two letters
of the alphabet. He also posited a fact which all
travelers have since confirmed: In all the
Library, there are no two identical books.
From those incontrovertible premises, the
librarian deduced that the Library is "total"—
perfect, complete, and whole—and that its
bookshelves contain all possible combinations
of the twenty-two orthographic symbols (a
number which, though unimaginably vast, is
not infinite)—that is, all that is able to be
expressed, in every language. All —the detailed
history of the future, the autobiographies of the
archangels, the faithful catalog of the Library,
thousands and thousands of false catalogs, the
proof of the falsity of those false catalogs, a
proof of the falsity of the true catalog, the
gnostic gospel of Basilides, the commentary
upon that gospel, the commentary on the
commentary on that gospel, the true story of
your death, the translation of every book into
every language, the interpolations of every book
into all books, the treatise Bede could have
written (but did not) on the mythology of the
Saxon people, the lost books of Tacitus.
When it was announced that the Library
contained all books, the first reaction was
unbounded joy. All men felt themselves the
possessors of an intact and secret treasure.
There was no personal problem, no world
problem, whose eloquent solution did not
exist—somewhere in some hexagon. The
universe was justified; the universe suddenly
became congruent with the unlimited width and
breadth of humankind's hope. At that period
there was much talk of The Vindications—books
of apologià and prophecies that would
vindicate for all time the actions of every person
in the universe and that held wondrous arcana
for men's futures. Thousands of greedy
individuals abandoned their sweet native
hexagons and rushed downstairs, up-stairs,
spurred by the vain desire to find their
Vindication. These pilgrims squabbled in the
narrow corridors, muttered dark imprecations,
strangled one another on the divine staircases,
threw deceiving volumes down ventilation
shafts, were themselves hurled to their deaths
by men of distant regions. Others went
insane.... The Vindications do exist (I have seen
two of them, which refer to persons in the
future, persons perhaps not imaginary), but
those who went in quest of them failed to recall
that the chance of a man's finding his own
Vindication, or some perfidious version of his
own, can be calculated to be zero.
At that same period there was also hope that
the fundamental mysteries of mankind—the
origin of the Library and of time—might be
revealed. In all likelihood those profound
mysteries can indeed be explained in words; if
the language of the philosophers is not
sufficient, then the multiform Library must
surely have produced the extraordinary
language that is required, together with the
words and grammar of that language. For four
centuries, men have been scouring the
hexagons.... There are official searchers, the
"inquisitors." I have seen them about their
tasks: they arrive exhausted at some hexagon,
they talk about a staircase that nearly killed
them—rungs were missing—they speak with the
librarian about galleries and staircases, and,
once in a while, they take up the nearest book
and leaf through it, searching for disgraceful or
dishonorable words. Clearly, no one expects to
discover anything.
That unbridled hopefulness was succeeded,
naturally enough, by a similarly
disproportionate depression.
The certainty that some bookshelf in some
hexagon contained precious books, yet that
those precious books were forever out of reach,
was almost unbearable. One blasphemous sect
proposed that the searches be discontinued and
that all men shuffle letters and symbols until
those canonical books, through some
improbable stroke of chance, had been
constructed. The authorities were forced to
issue strict orders. The sect disappeared, but in
my childhood I have seen old men who for long
periods would hide in the latrines with metal
disks and a forbidden dice cup, feebly
mimicking the divine disorder.
Others, going about it in the opposite way,
thought the first thing to do was eliminate all
worthless books.
They would invade the hexagons, show
credentials that were not always false, leaf
disgustedly through a volume, and condemn
entire walls of books. It is to their hygienic,
ascetic rage that we lay the senseless loss of
millions of volumes. Their name is execrated
today, but those who grieve over the "treasures"
destroyed in that frenzy overlook two widely
acknowledged facts: One, that the Library is so
huge that any reduction by human hands must
be infinitesimal. And two, that each book is
unique and irreplaceable, but (since the Library
is total) there are always several hundred
thousand imperfect facsimiles—books that
differ by no more than a single letter, or a
comma. Despite general opinion, I daresay that
the consequences of the depredations
committed by the Purifiers have been
exaggerated by the horror those same fanatics
inspired. They were spurred on by the holy zeal
to reach—someday, through unrelenting
effort—the books of the Crimson Hexagon—
books smaller than natural books, books
omnipotent, illustrated, and magical.
We also have knowledge of another
superstition from that period: belief in what
was termed the Book Man. On some shelf in
some hexagon, it was argued, there must exist a
book that is the cipher and perfect compendium
of all other books, and some librarian must
have examined that book; this librarian is
analogous to a god. In the language of this zone
there are still vestiges of the sect that worshiped
that distant librarian. Many have gone in search
of Him. For a hundred years, men beat every
possible path— and every path in vain. How
was one to locate the idolized secret hexagon
that sheltered Him? Someone proposed
searching by regression: To locate book A, first
consult book B, which tells where book A can be
found; to locate book B, first consult book C,
and so on, to infinity....
It is in ventures such as these that I have
squandered and spent my years. I cannot think
it unlikely that there is such a total book3
3 I repeat: In order for a book to exist, it is
sufficient that it be possible. Only the
impossible is excluded. For example, no book is
also a staircase, though there are no doubt
books that discuss and deny and prove that
possibility, and others whose structure
corresponds to that of a staircase on some shelf
in the universe. I pray to the unknown gods that
some man—even a single man, tens of centuries
ago—has perused and read that book. If the
honor and wisdom and joy of such a reading are
not to be my own, then let them be for others.
Let heaven exist, though my own place be in
hell. Let me be tortured and battered and
annihilated, but let there be one instant, one
creature, wherein thy enormous Library may
find its justification.
Infidels claim that the rule in the Library is
not "sense," but "nonsense," and that
"rationality" (even humble, pure coherence) is
an almost miraculous exception. They speak, I
know, of "the feverish Library, whose random
volumes constantly threaten to transmogrify
into others, so that they affirm all things, deny
all things, and confound and confuse all things,
like some mad and hallucinating deity." Those
words, which not only proclaim disorder but
exemplify it as well, prove, as all can see, the
infidels' deplorable taste and desperate
ignorance. For while the Library contains all
verbal structures, all the variations allowed by
the twenty-five orthographic symbols, it
includes not a single absolute piece of
nonsense. It would be pointless to observe that
the finest volume of all the many hexagons that
I myself administer is titled Combed Thunder,
while another is titled The Plaster Cramp, and
another, Axaxaxasmio. Those phrases, at first
apparently incoherent, are undoubtedly
susceptible to cryptographic or allegorical
"reading"; that reading, that justification of the
words' order and existence, is itself verbal and,
ex hypothesis, already contained somewhere in
the Library. There is no combination of
characters one can make— dhcmrlchtdj, for
example—that the divine Library has not
foreseen and that in one or more of its secret
tongues does not hide a terrible significance.
There is no syllable one can speak that is not
filled with tenderness and terror, that is not, in
one of those languages, the mighty name of a
god. To speak is to commit tautologies. This
pointless, verbose epistle already exists in one
of the thirty volumes of the five bookshelves in
one of the countless hexagons—as does its
refutation. (A number n of the possible
languages employ the same vocabulary; in some
of them, the symbol "library" possesses the
correct definition "everlasting, ubiquitous
system of hexagonal galleries," while a library—
the thing—is a loaf of bread or a pyramid or
something else, and the six words that define it
themselves have other definitions. You who
read me—are you certain you understand my
language?) Methodical composition distracts
me from the present condition of humanity.
The certainty that everything has already been
written annuls us, or renders us phantasmal. I
know districts in which the young people
prostrate themselves before books and like
savages kiss their pages, though they cannot
read a letter. Epidemics, heretical discords,
pilgrimages that inevitably degenerate into
brigandage have decimated the population. I
believe I mentioned the suicides, which are
more and more frequent every year. I am
perhaps misled by old age and fear, but I
suspect that the human species— the only
species—teeters at the verge of extinction, yet
that the Library— enlightened, solitary, infinite,
perfectly unmoving, armed with precious
volumes, pointless, incorruptible, and secret—
will endure.
I have just written the word "infinite." I have
not included that adjective out of mere
rhetorical habit; I hereby state that it is not
illogical to think that the world is infinite. Those
who believe it to have limits hypothesize that in
some remote place or places the corridors and
staircases and hexagons may, inconceivably,
end—which is absurd. And yet those who
picture the world as unlimited forget that the
number of possible books is not. I will be bold
enough to suggest this solution to the ancient
problem: The Library is unlimited but periodic.
If an eternal traveler should journey in any
direction, he would find after untold centuries
that the same volumes are repeated in the same
disorder—which, repeated, becomes order: the
Order. My solitude is cheered by that elegant
hope.
Like all the men of Babylon, I have been
proconsul; like all, I have been a slave. I have
known omnipotence, ignominy, imprisonment.
Look here— my right hand has no index finger.
Look here—through this gash in my cape you
can see on my stomach a crimson tattoo—it is
the second letter, Beth.
On nights when the moon is full, this symbol
gives me power over men with the mark of
Gimel, but it subjects me to those with the
Aleph, who on nights when there is no moon
owe obedience to those marked with the Gimel. 
In the half-light of dawn, in a cellar, standing
before a black altar, I have slit the throats of
sacred bulls. Once, for an entire lunar year, I
was declared invisible—I would cry out and no
one would heed my call, I would steal bread and
not be beheaded. I have known that thing the
Greeks knew not—uncertainty. In a chamber of
brass, as I faced the strangler's silent scarf,
hope did not abandon me; in the river of
delights, panic has not failed me. Heraclides
Ponticus reports, admiringly, that Pythagoras
recalled having been Pyrrhus, and before that,
Euphorbus, and before that, some other mortal;
in order to recall similar vicissitudes, I have no
need of death, nor even of imposture.
I owe that almost monstrous variety to an
institution—the Lottery— which is unknown in
other nations, or at work in them imperfectly or
secretly. I have not delved into this institution's
history. I know that sages cannot agree. About
its mighty purposes I know as much as a man
untutored in astrology might know about the
moon. Mine is a dizzying country in which the
Lottery is a major element of reality; until this 
day, I have thought as little about it as about the
conduct of the indecipherable gods or of my
heart.
Now, far from Babylon and its beloved
customs, I think with some bewilderment about
the Lottery, and about the blasphemous
conjectures that shrouded men whisper in the
half-light of dawn or evening.
My father would tell how once, long ago—
centuries? years?—the lottery in Babylon was a
game played by commoners. He would tell
(though whether this is true or not, I cannot
say) how barbers would take a man's copper
coins and give back rectangles made of bone or
parchment and adorned with symbols.
Then, in broad daylight, a drawing would be
held; those smiled upon by fate would, with no
further corroboration by chance, win coins
minted of silver. The procedure, as you can see,
was rudimentary.
Naturally, those so-called "lotteries" were a
failure. They had no moral force whatsoever;
they appealed not to all a man's faculties, but
only to his hopefulness. Public indifference 
soon meant that the merchants who had
founded these venal lotteries began to lose
money. Someone tried something new:
including among the list of lucky numbers a few
unlucky draws. This innovation meant that
those who bought those numbered rectangles
now had a twofold chance: they might win a
sum of money or they might be required to pay
a fine—sometimes a considerable one. As one
might expect, that small risk (for every thirty
"good" numbers there was one ill-omened one)
piqued the public's interest. Babylonians
flocked to buy tickets. The man who bought
none was considered a pusillanimous wretch, a
man with no spirit of adventure. In time, this
justified contempt found a second target: not
just the man who didn't play, but also the man
who lost and paid the fine. The Company (as it
was now beginning to be known) had to protect
the interest of the winners, who could not be
paid their prizes unless the pot contained
almost the entire amount of the fines. A lawsuit
was filed against the losers: the judge sentenced
them to pay the original fine, plus court costs, 
or spend a number of days in jail. In order to
thwart the Company, they all chose jail. From
that gauntlet thrown down by a few men sprang
the Company's omnipotence—its ecclesiastical,
metaphysical force.
Some time after this, the announcements of
the numbers drawn began to leave out the lists
of fines and simply print the days of prison
assigned to each losing number. That
shorthand, as it were, which went virtually
unnoticed at the time, was of utmost
importance: It was the first appearance of nonpecuniary elements in the lottery. And it met
with great success—indeed, the Company was
forced by its players to increase the number of
unlucky draws.
As everyone knows, the people of Babylon
are great admirers of logic, and even of
symmetry. It was inconsistent that lucky
numbers should payoff in round silver coins
while unlucky ones were measured in days and
nights of jail. Certain moralists argued that the
possession of coins did not always bring about
happiness, and that other forms of happiness
were perhaps more direct.
The lower-caste neighborhoods of the city
voiced a different complaint. The members of
the priestly class gambled heavily, and so
enjoyed all the vicissitudes of terror and hope;
the poor (with understandable, or inevitable,
envy) saw themselves denied access to that
famously delightful, even sensual, wheel. The
fair and reasonable desire that all men and
women, rich and poor, be able to take part
equally in the Lottery inspired indignant
demonstrations—the memory of which, time
has failed to dim. Some stubborn souls could
not (or pretended they could not) understand
that this was a novu sordo sedorum, a
necessary stage of history.... A slave stole a
crimson ticket; the drawing determined that
that ticket entitled the bearer to have his tongue
burned out. The code of law provided the same
sentence for stealing a lottery ticket. Some
Babylonians argued that the slave deserved the
burning iron for being a thief; others, more
magnanimous, that the executioner should
employ the iron because thus fate had
decreed.... There were disturbances, there were
regrettable instances of bloodshed, but the
masses of Babylon at last, over the opposition of
the well-to-do, imposed their will; they saw
their generous objectives fully achieved. First,
the Company was forced to assume all public
power. (The unification was necessary because
of the vastness and complexity of the new
operations.) Second, the Lottery was made
secret, free of charge, and open to all. The
mercenary sale of lots was abolished; once
initiated into the mysteries of Baal, every free
man automatically took part in the sacred
drawings, which were held in the labyrinths of
the god every sixty nights and determined each
man's destiny until the next drawing. The
consequences were incalculable. A lucky draw
might bring about a man's elevation to the
council of the magi or the imprisonment of his
enemy (secret, or known by all to be so), or
might allow him to find, in the peaceful
dimness of his room, the woman who would
begin to disturb him, or whom he had never
hoped to see again; an unlucky draw:
mutilation, dishonor of many kinds, death
itself. Sometimes a single event—the murder of
C in a tavern, B's mysterious apotheosis—would
be the inspired outcome of thirty or forty
drawings. Combining bets was difficult, but we
must recall that the individuals of the Company
were (and still are) all-powerful, and clever. In
many cases, the knowledge that certain happy
turns were the simple result of chance would
have lessened the force of those outcomes; to
forestall that problem, agents of the Company
employed suggestion, or even magic. The paths
they followed, the intrigues they wove, were
invariably secret. To penetrate the innermost
hopes and innermost fears of every man, they
called upon astrologers and spies. There were
certain stone lions, a sacred latrine called
Qaphqa, some cracks in a dusty aqueduct—
these places, it was generally believed, gave
access to the Company, and well- or ill-wishing
persons would deposit confidential reports in
them. An alphabetical file held those dossiers of
varying veracity.
Incredibly, there was talk of favoritism, of
corruption. With its customary discretion, the
Company did not reply directly; instead, it
scrawled its brief argument in the rubble of a
mask factory. This apologia is now numbered
among the sacred Scriptures. It pointed out,
doctrinally, that the Lottery is an interpolation
of chance into the order of the universe, and
observed that to accept errors is to strengthen
chance, not contravene it. It also noted that
those lions, that sacred squatting-place, though
not disavowed by the Company (which reserved
the right to consult them), functioned with no
official guarantee.
This statement quieted the public's concerns.
But it also produced other effects perhaps
unforeseen by its author. It profoundly altered
both the spirit and the operations of the
Company. I have but little time remaining; we
are told that the ship is about to sail—but I will
try to explain.
However unlikely it may seem, no one, until
that time, had attempted to produce a general
theory of gaming. Babylonians are not a
speculative people; they obey the dictates of
chance, surrender their lives, their hopes, their
nameless terror to it, but it never occurs to
them to delve into its labyrinthine laws or the
revolving spheres that manifest its workings.
Nonetheless, the semiofficial statement that I
mentioned inspired numerous debates of a legal
and mathematical nature. From one of them,
there emerged the following conjecture: If the
Lottery is an intensification of chance, a
periodic infusion of chaos into the cosmos, then
is it not appropriate that chance intervene in
every aspect of the drawing, not just one? Is it
not ludicrous that chance should dictate a
person's death while the circumstances of that
death—whether private or public, whether
drawn out for an hour or a century—should not
be subject to chance? Those perfectly
reasonable objections finally prompted
sweeping reform; the complexities of the new
system (complicated further by its having been
in practice for centuries) are understood by only
a handful of specialists, though I will attempt to
summarize them, even if only symbolically.
Let us imagine a first drawing, which
condemns a man to death. In pursuance of that
decree, another drawing is held; out of that
second drawing come, say, nine possible
executors. Of those nine, four might initiate a
third drawing to determine the name of the
executioner, two might replace the unlucky
draw with a lucky one (the discovery of a
treasure, say), another might decide that the
death should be exacerbated (death with
dishonor, that is, or with the refinement of
torture), others might simply refuse to carry out
the sentence----That is the scheme of the
Lottery, put symbolically. In reality, the
number of drawings is infinite. No decision is
final; all branch into others. The ignorant
assume that infinite drawings require infinite
time; actually, all that is required is that time be
infinitely sub-divisible, as in the famous parable
of the Race with the Tortoise. That infinitude
coincides remarkably well with the sinuous
numbers of Chance and with the Heavenly
Archetype of the Lottery beloved of Platonists....
Some distorted echo of our custom seems to
have reached the Tiber: In his Life of Antoninus 
Heliogabalus, AElius Lampridius tells us that
the emperor wrote out on seashells the fate that
he intended for his guests at dinner—some
would receive ten pounds of gold; others, ten
houseflies, ten dormice, ten bears. It is fair to
recall that Heliogabalus was raised in Asia
Minor, among the priests of his eponymous
god.
There are also impersonal drawings, whose
purpose is unclear. One drawing decrees that a
sapphire from Taprobana be thrown into the
waters of the Euphrates; another, that a bird be
released from the top of a certain tower;
another, that every hundred years a grain of
sand be added to (or taken from) the countless
grains of sand on a certain beach. Sometimes,
the consequences are terrible.
Under the Company's beneficent influence,
our customs are now steeped in chance. The
purchaser of a dozen amphorae of Damascene
wine will not be surprised if one contains a
talisman, or a viper; the scribe who writes out a
contract never fails to include some error; I
myself, in this hurried statement, have
misrepresented some splendor, some atrocity—
perhaps, too, some mysterious monotony....
Our historians, the most perspicacious on the
planet, have invented a method for correcting
chance; it is well known that the outcomes of
this method are (in general) trust-worthy—
although, of course, they are never divulged
without a measure of deception. Besides, there
is nothing so tainted with fiction as the history
of the Company....A paleographie document,
unearthed at a certain temple, may come from
yesterday's drawing or from a drawing that took
place centuries ago. No book is published
without some discrepancy between each of the
edition's copies. Scribes take a secret oath to
omit, interpolate, alter. Indirect falsehood is
also practiced.
The Company, with godlike modesty, shuns
all publicity. Its agents, of course, are secret; the
orders it constantly (perhaps continually)
imparts are no different from those spread
wholesale by impostors.
Besides—who will boast of being a mere
impostor? The drunken man who blurts out an 
absurd command, the sleeping man who
suddenly awakes and turns and chokes to death
the woman sleeping at his side—are they not,
perhaps, implementing one of the Company's
secret decisions? That silent functioning, like
God's, inspires all manner of conjectures. One
scurrilously suggests that the Company ceased
to exist hundreds of years ago, and that the
sacred disorder of our lives is purely hereditary,
traditional; another believes that the Company
is eternal, and teaches that it shall endure until
the last night, when the last god shall annihilate
the earth. Yet another declares that the
Company is omnipotent, but affects only small
things: the cry of a bird, the shades of rust and
dust, the half dreams that come at dawn.
Another, whispered by masked heresiarchs,
says that the Company has never existed, and
never will. Another, no less despicable, argues
that it makes no difference whether one affirms
or denies the reality of the shadowy
corporation, because Babylon is nothing but an
infinite game of chance. 
In London, in early June of the year 1929, 
the rare book dealer Joseph Cartaphilus, of
Smyrna, offered the princess de Lucinge the six
quarto minor volumes (1715-1720) of Pope's
Iliad. The princess purchased them; when she
took possession of them, she exchanged a few
words with the dealer. He was, she says, an
emaciated, grimy man with gray eyes and gray
beard and singularly vague features. He
expressed himself with untutored and
uncorrected fluency in several languages;
within scant minutes he shifted from French to
English and from English to an enigmatic cross
between the Spanish of Salonika and the
Portuguese of Macao. In October, the princess
heard from a passenger on the Zeus that
Cartaphilus had died at sea while returning to
Smyrna, and that he had been buried on the
island of Cos.
In the last volume of the Iliad she found this
manuscript.
It is written in an English that teems with
Latinisms; this is a verbatim transcription of
the document. 
I
As I recall, my travails began in a garden in
hundred-gated Thebes, in the time of the
emperor Diocletian. I had fought (with no
glory) in the recent Egyptian wars and was
tribune of a legion quartered in Berenice, on the
banks of the Red Sea; there, fever and magic
consumed many men who magnanimously
coveted the steel blade. The Mauritanians were
defeated; the lands once occupied by the rebel
cities were dedicated in œternitatem to the
Plutonian gods; Alexandria, subdued, in vain
sought Caesar's mercy; within the year the
legions were to report their triumph, but I
myself barely glimpsed the face of Mars. That
privation grieved me, and was perhaps why I
threw myself into the quest, through vagrant
and terrible deserts, for the secret City of the
Immortals.
My travails, I have said, began in a garden in
Thebes. All that night I did not sleep, for there
was a combat in my heart. I rose at last a little
before dawn. My slaves were sleeping; the
moon was the color of the infinite sand. A
bloody rider was approaching from the east,
weak with exhaustion. A few steps from me, he
dismounted and in a faint, insatiable voice
asked me, in Latin, the name of the river whose
waters laved the city's walls. I told him it was
the Egypt, fed by the rains. "It is another river
that I seek," he replied morosely, "the secret
river that purifies men of death." Dark blood
was welling from his breast. He told me that the
country of his birth was a mountain that lay
beyond the Ganges; it was rumored on that
mountain, he told me, that if one traveled
westward, to the end of the world, one would
come to the river whose waters give
immortality. He added that on the far shore of
that river lay the City of the Immortals, a city
rich in bulwarks and amphitheaters and
temples. He died before dawn, but I resolved to
go in quest of that city and its river. When
interrogated by the torturer, some of the
Mauritanian prisoners confirmed the traveler's
tale: One of them recalled the Elysian plain, far
at the ends of the earth, where men's lives are
everlasting; another, the peaks from which the 
Pactolus flows, upon which men live for a
hundred years. In Rome, I spoke with
philosophers who felt that to draw out the span
of a man's life was to draw out the agony of his
dying and multiply the number of his deaths. I
am not certain whether I ever believed in the
City of the Immortals; I think the task of finding
it was enough for me. Flavius, the Getulian
proconsul, entrusted two hundred soldiers to
me for the venture; I also recruited a number of
mercenaries who claimed they knew the roads,
and who were the first to desert.
Subsequent events have so distorted the
memory of our first days that now they are
impossible to put straight. We set out from
Arsinoë and entered the ardent desert. We
crossed the lands of the Troglodytes, who
devour serpents and lack all verbal commerce;
the land of the Garamantas, whose women are
held in common and whose food is lions; the
land of the Augiles, who worship only Tartarus.
We ranged the width and breadth of other
deserts—deserts of black sand, where the
traveler must usurp the hours of the night, for 
the fervency of the day is unbearable. From afar
I made out the mountain which gives its name
to the Ocean; on its slopes grows the euphorbia,
an antidote to poisons, and on its peak live the
Satyrs, a nation of wild and rustic men given to
lasciviousness. That the bosom of those
barbaric lands, where the Earth is the mother of
monsters, might succor a famous city—such a
thing seemed unthinkable to us all. Thus we
continued with our march, for to have regressed
would have been to dishonor ourselves. Some of
the men, those who were most temerarious,
slept with their faces exposed to the moon; soon
they burned with fever. With the depraved
water of the watering holes others drank up
insanity and death. Then began the desertions;
a short time afterward, the mutinies. In
repressing them I did not hesitate to employ
severity. In that I acted justly, but a centurion
warned me that the mutineers (keen to avenge
the crucifixion of one of their number) were
weaving a plot for my death. I fled the camp
with the few soldiers who were loyal to me; in
the desert, among whirlwinds of sand and the
vast night, we became separated. A Cretan
arrow rent my flesh. For several days I
wandered without finding water—or one huge
day multiplied by the sun, thirst, and the fear of
thirst. I left my path to the will of my horse. At
dawn, the distance bristled with pyramids and
towers. I dreamed, unbearably, of a small and
orderly labyrinth at whose center lay a well; my
hands could almost touch it, my eyes see it, but
so bewildering and entangled were the turns
that I knew I would die before I reached it.
II
When I disentangled myself at last from that
nightmare, I found that my hands were bound
behind my back and I was lying in an oblong
stone niche no bigger than a common grave,
scraped into the caustic slope of a mountain.
The sides of the cavity were humid, and had
been polished as much by time as by human
hands. In my chest I felt a painful throbbing,
and I burned with thirst. I raised my head and
cried out weakly. At the foot of the mountain
ran a noiseless, impure stream, clogged by sand 
and rubble; on the far bank, the patent City of
the Immortals shone dazzlingly in the last (or
first) rays of the sun. I could see fortifications,
arches, frontispieces, and forums; the
foundation of it all was a stone plateau. A
hundred or more irregular niches like my own
riddled the mountain and the valley. In the
sand had been dug shallow holes; from those
wretched holes, from the niches, emerged
naked men with gray skin and neglected beards.
I thought I recognized these men: they
belonged to the bestial lineage of the
Troglodytes, who infest the shorelines of the
Persian Gulf and the grottoes of Ethiopia; I was
surprised neither by the fact that they did not
speak nor by seeing them devour serpents.
Urgent thirst lent me temerity. I estimated
that I was some thirty paces from the sand; I
closed my eyes and threw myself down the
mountain, my hands bound behind my back. I
plunged my bloodied face into the dark water
and lapped at it like an animal. Before I lost
myself in sleep and delirium once more, I
inexplicably repeated a few words of Greek:
Those from Zeleia, wealthy Trojans, who drink
the water of dark Aisepos...
I cannot say how many days and nights
passed over me. In pain, unable to return to the
shelter of the caverns, naked on the unknown
sand, I let the moon and the sun cast lots for my
bleak fate. The Troglodytes, childlike in their
barbarity, helped me neither survive nor die. In
vain did I plead with them to kill me. One day,
with the sharp edge of a flake of rock, I severed
my bonds. The next, I stood up and was able to
beg or steal—I, Marcus Flaminius Rufus,
military tribune of one of the legions of Rome
—my first abominated mouthful of serpent's
flesh.
Out of avidity to see the Immortals, to touch
that more than human City, I could hardly
sleep. And as though the Troglodytes could
divine my goal, they did not sleep, either. At
first I presumed they were keeping a watch over
me; later, I imagined that my uneasiness had
communicated itself to them, as dogs can be
infected in that way. For my departure from the
barbarous village I chose the most public of
times, sunset, when almost all the men emerged
from their holes and crevices in the earth and
gazed out unseeingly toward the west. I prayed
aloud, less to plead for divine favor than to
intimidate the tribe with articulate speech. I
crossed the stream bed clogged with sandbars
and turned my steps toward the City.
Two or three men followed me confusedly;
they were of short stature (like the others of
that species), and inspired more revulsion than
fear. I had to skirt a number of irregular pits
that I took to be ancient quarries; misled by the
City's enormous size, I had thought it was much
nearer. Toward midnight, I set my foot upon
the black shadow—bristling with idolatrous
shapes upon the yellow sand—of the City's wall.
My steps were halted by a kind of sacred horror.
So abhorred by mankind are novelty and the
desert that I was cheered to note that one of the
Troglodytes had accompanied me to the last. I
closed my eyes and waited, unsleeping, for the
dawn.
I have said that the City was builded on a
stone plateau. That plateau, with its precipitous 
sides, was as difficult to scale as the walls. In
vain did my weary feet walk round it; the black
foundation revealed not the slightest
irregularity, and the invariance of the walls
proscribed even a single door. The force of the
day drove me to seek refuge in a cavern; toward
the rear there was a pit, and out of the pit, out
of the gloom below, rose a ladder. I descended
the ladder and made my way through a chaos of
squalid galleries to a vast, indistinct circular
chamber. Nine doors opened into that cellarlike place; eight led to a maze that returned,
deceitfully, to the same chamber; the ninth led
through another maze to a second circular
chamber identical to the first. I am not certain
how many chambers there were; my misery and
anxiety multiplied them. The silence was
hostile, and virtually perfect; aside from a
subterranean wind whose cause I never
discovered, within those deep webs of stone
there was no sound; even the thin streams of
iron-colored water that trickled through
crevices in the stone were noiseless. Horribly, I
grew used to that dubious world; it began to
seem incredible that anything could exist save
nine-doored cellars and long, forking
subterranean corridors. I know not how long I
wandered under the earth; I do know that from
time to time, in a confused dream of home, I
conflated the horrendous village of the
barbarians and the city of my birth, among the
clusters of grapes.
At the end of one corridor, a not unforeseen
wall blocked my path— and a distant light fell
upon me. I raised my dazzled eyes; above,
vertiginously high above, I saw a circle of sky so
blue it was almost purple. The metal treads of a
stairway led up the wall. Weariness made my
muscles slack, but I climbed the stairs, only
pausing from time to time to sob clumsily with
joy. Little by little I began to discern friezes and
the capitals of columns, triangular pediments
and vaults, confused glories carved in granite
and marble. Thus it was that I was led to ascend
from the blind realm of black and intertwining
labyrinths into the brilliant City.
I emerged into a kind of small plaza—a
courtyard might better describe it. It was
surrounded by a single building, of irregular
angles and varying heights. It was to this
heterogeneous building that the many cupolas
and columns belonged. More than any other
feature of that incredible monument, I was
arrested by the great antiquity of its
construction. I felt that it had existed before
humankind, before the world itself.
Its patent antiquity (though somehow
terrible to the eyes) seemed to accord with the
labor of immortal artificers. Cautiously at first,
with indifference as time went on, desperately
toward the end, I wandered the staircases and
inlaid floors of that labyrinthine palace. (I
discovered afterward that the width and height
of the treads on the staircases were not
constant; it was this that explained the
extraordinary weariness I felt.) This palace is
the work of the gods, was my first thought. I
explored the uninhabited spaces, and I
corrected myself: The gods that built this place
have died. Then I reflected upon its
peculiarities, and told myself: The gods that
built this place were mad. I said this, I know, 
in a tone of incomprehensible reproof that
verged upon remorse—with more intellectual
horror than sensory fear.
The impression of great antiquity was joined
by others: the impression of endlessness, the
sensation of oppressiveness and horror, the
sensation of complex irrationality. I had made
my way through a dark maze, but it was the
bright City of the Immortals that terrified and
repelled me. A maze is a house built purposely
to confuse men; its architecture, prodigal in
symmetries, is made to serve that purpose. In
the palace that I imperfectly explored, the
architecture had no purpose. There were
corridors that led nowhere, unreachably high
windows, grandly dramatic doors that opened
onto monklike cells or empty shafts, incredible
upside-down staircases with upside-down
treads and balustrades. Other staircases,
clinging airily to the side of a monumental wall,
petered out after two or three landings, in the
high gloom of the cupolas, arriving nowhere. I
cannot say whether these are literal examples I
have given; I do know that for many years they 
plagued my troubled dreams; I can no longer
know whether any given feature is a faithful
transcription of reality or one of the shapes
unleashed by my nights. This City, I thought, is
so horrific that its mere existence, the mere fact
of its having endured — even in the middle of a
secret desert— pollutes the past and the future
and somehow compromises the stars. So long
as this City endures, no one in the world can
ever be happy or courageous. I do not want to
describe it; a chaos of heterogeneous words, the
body of a tiger or a bull pullulating with teeth,
organs, and heads monstrously yoked together
yet hating each other—those might, perhaps, be
approximate images.
I cannot recall the stages by which I
returned, nor my path through the dusty,
humid crypts. I know only that I was
accompanied by the constant fear that when I
emerged from the last labyrinth I would be
surrounded once again by the abominable City
of the Immortals. I remember nothing else.
That loss of memory, now insurmountable, was
perhaps willful; it is possible that the
circumstances of my escape were so unpleasant
that on some day no less lost to memory I swore
to put them out of my mind.
III
Those who have read the story of my travails
attentively will recall that a man of the
Troglodyte tribe had followed me, as a dog
might have, into the jagged shadow of the walls.
When I emerged from the last cellar, I found
him at the mouth of the cavern. He was lying in
the sand, clumsily drawing and rubbing out a
row of symbols that resembled those letters in
dreams that one is just on the verge of
understanding when they merge and blur. At
first I thought that this was some sort of
barbaric writing; then I realized that it was
absurd to imagine that men who had never
learned to speak should have invented writing.
Nor did any one of the shapes resemble any
other—a fact that ruled out (or made quite
remote) the possibility that they were symbols.
The man would draw them, look at them, and
correct them. Then suddenly, as though his
game irritated him, he would rub them out with
his palm and forearm. He looked up at me,
though he seemed not to recognize me. Still, so
great was the relief I felt (or so great, so
dreadful had my loneliness been) that I actually
thought that this primitive Troglodyte looking
up at me from the floor of a cave had been
waiting for me. The sun warmed the plain; as
we began our return to the village, under the
first stars of evening, the sand burned our feet.
The Troglodyte walked ahead of me; that night I
resolved to teach him to recognize, perhaps
even to repeat, a few words. Dogs and horses, I
reflected, are able to do the first; many birds,
like the Caesars' nightingale, can do the second.
However scant a man's understanding, it will
always be greater than that of unreasoning
beasts.
The Troglodyte's lowly birth and condition
recalled to my memory the image of Argos, the
moribund old dog of the Odyssey, so I gave
him the name Argos, and tried to teach it to
him. Time and time again, I failed. No means I
employed, no severity, no obstinacy of mine 
availed. Motionless, his eyes dead, he seemed
not even to perceive the sounds which I was
attempting to imprint upon him. Though but a
few paces from me, he seemed immensely
distant. Lying in the sand like a small, battered
sphinx carved from lava, he allowed the
heavens to circle in the sky above him from the
first dusky light of morning to the last dusky
light of night. It seemed simply impossible that
he had not grasped my intention. I recalled that
it is generally believed among the Ethiopians
that monkeys deliberately do not speak, so that
they will not be forced to work; I attributed
Argos' silence to distrust or fear. From that
vivid picture I passed on to others, even more
extravagant. I reflected that Argos and I lived
our lives in separate universes; I reflected that
our perceptions were identical but that Argos
combined them differently than I, constructed
from them different objects; I reflected that
perhaps for him there were no objects, but
rather a constant, dizzying play of swift
impressions. I imagined a world without
memory, without time; I toyed with the
possibility of a language that had no nouns, a
language of impersonal verbs or indeclinable
adjectives. In these reflections many days went
by, and with the days, years. Until one morning,
something very much like joy occurred—the sky
rained slow, strong rain.
Nights in the desert can be frigid, but that
night had been like a cauldron. I dreamed that a
river in Thessaly (into whose waters I had
thrown back a golden fish) was coming to save
me; I could hear it approaching over the red
sand and the black rock; a coolness in the air
and the scurrying sound of rain awakened me. I
ran out naked to welcome it. The night was
waning; under the yellow clouds, the tribe, as
joyously as I, was offering itself up to the vivid
torrents in a kind of ecstasy—they reminded me
of Corybantes possessed by the god. Argos, his
eyes fixed on the empyrean, was moaning;
streams of water rolled down his face—not just
rain, but also (I later learned) tears. Argos, I
cried, Argos!
Then, with gentle wonder, as though
discovering something lost and forgotten for
many years, Argos stammered out these words:
Argos, Ulysses' dog. And then, without looking
at me, This dog lying on the dungheap.
We accept reality so readily—perhaps
because we sense that nothing is real. I asked
Argos how much of the Odyssey he knew. He
found using Greek difficult; I had to repeat the
question.
Very little, he replied. Less than the
meagerest rhapsode. It has been eleven
hundred years since last I wrote it.
IV
That day, all was revealed to me. The
Troglodytes were the Immortals; the stream
and its sand-laden waters, the River sought by
the rider. As for the City whose renown had
spread to the very Ganges, the Immortals had
destroyed it almost nine hundred years ago. Out
of the shattered remains of the City's ruin they
had built on the same spot the incoherent city I
had wandered through—that parody or
antithesis of City which was also a temple to the
irrational gods that rule the world and to those 
gods about whom we know nothing save that
they do not resemble man. The founding of this
city was the last symbol to which the Immortals
had descended; it marks the point at which,
esteeming all exertion vain, they resolved to live
in thought, in pure speculation. They built that
carapace, abandoned it, and went off to make
their dwellings in the caves. In their selfabsorption, they scarcely perceived the physical
world.
These things were explained to me by Homer
as one might explain things to a child. He also
told me of his own old age and of that late
journey he had made—driven, like Ulysses, by
the intention to arrive at the nation of men that
know not what the sea is, that eat not salted
meat, that know not what an oar might be. He
lived for a century in the City of the Immortals,
and when it was destroyed it was he who
counseled that this other one be built. We
should not be surprised by that—it is rumored
that after singing of the war of Ilion, he sang of
the war between the frogs and rats. He was like
a god who created first the Cosmos, and then
Chaos.
There is nothing very remarkable about
being immortal; with the exception of mankind,
all creatures are immortal, for they know
nothing of death. What is divine, terrible, and
incomprehensible is to know oneself immortal.
I have noticed that in spite of religion, the
conviction as to one's own immortality is
extraordinarily rare. Jews, Christians, and
Muslims all profess belief in immortality, but
the veneration paid to the first century of life is
proof that they truly believe only in those
hundred years, for they destine all the rest,
throughout eternity, to rewarding or punishing
what one did when alive. In my view, the
Wheel conceived by certain religions in
Hindustan is much more plausible; on that
Wheel, which has neither end nor beginning,
each life is the effect of the previous life and
engenderer of the next, yet no one life
determines the whole.... Taught by centuries of
living, the republic of immortal men had
achieved a perfection of tolerance, almost of
disdain. They knew that over an infinitely long 
span of time, all things happen to all men. As
reward for his past and future virtues, every
man merited every kindness—yet also every
betrayal, as reward for his past and future
iniquities. Much as the way in games of chance,
heads and tails tend to even out, so cleverness
and dullness cancel and correct each other.
Perhaps the rude poem of El Cid is the
counterweight demanded by a single epithet of
the Eclogues or a maxim from Heraclitus. The
most fleeting thought obeys an invisible plan,
and may crown, or inaugurate, a secret design. I
know of men who have done evil in order that
good may come of it in future centuries, or may
already have come of it in centuries past....
Viewed in that way, all our acts are just, though
also unimportant. There are no spiritual or
intellectual merits. Homer composed the
Odyssey; given infinite time, with infinite
circumstances and changes, it is impossible that
the Odyssey should not be composed at least
once. No one is someone; a single immortal
man is all men. Like Cornelius Agrippa,I am
god, hero, philosopher, demon, and world—
which is a long-winded way of saying that Aim
not.
The notion of the world as a system of exact
compensations had an enormous influence on
the Immortals. In the first place, it made them
immune to pity. I have mentioned the ancient
quarries that dotted the countryside on the far
bank of the stream; a man fell into the deepest
of those pits; he could not be hurt, could not
die, and yet he burned with thirst; seventy years
passed before he was thrown a rope. Nor was he
much interested in his own fate. His body was a
submissive domestic animal; all the charity it
required each month was a few hours' sleep, a
little water, and a scrap of meat. But let no one
imagine that we were mere ascetics. There is no
more complex pleasure than thought, and it was
to thought that we delivered ourselves over.
From time to time, some extraordinary
stimulus might bring us back to the physical
world—for example, on that dawn, the ancient
elemental pleasure of the rain. But those lapses
were extremely rare; all Immortals were
capable of perfect quietude. I recall one whom I 
never saw standing—a bird had made its nest
on his breast.
Among the corollaries to the doctrine that
there is no thing that is not counterbalanced by
another, there is one that has little theoretical
importance but that caused us, at the beginning
or end of the tenth century, to scatter over the
face of the earth. It may be summarized in these
words: There is a river whose waters give
immortality; somewhere there must be
another river whose waters take it away. The
number of rivers is not infinite; an immortal
traveler wandering the world will someday have
drunk from them all. We resolved to find that
river.
Death (or reference to death) makes men
precious and pathetic; their ghostliness is
touching; any act they perform may be their
last; there is no face that is not on the verge of
blurring and fading away like the faces in a
dream. Everything in the world of mortals has
the value of the irrecoverable and contingent.
Among the Immortals, on the other hand,
every act (every thought) is the echo of others
that preceded it in the past, with no visible
beginning, and the faithful presage of others
that will repeat it in the future, advertiginem.
There is nothing that is not as though lost
between indefatigable mirrors. Nothing can
occur but once, nothing is preciously in peril of
being lost. The elegiac, the somber, the
ceremonial are not modes the Immortals hold
in reverence. Homer and I went our separate
ways at the portals of Tangier; I do not think we
said good-bye.
I wandered through new realms, new
empires. In the autumn of 1066 I fought at
Stamford Bridge, though I no longer recall
whether I stood in the ranks of Harold, soon to
meet his fate, or in the ranks of that ill-fated
Harald Hardrada who conquered only six feet
or a little more of English soil. In the seventh
century of the Hegira, on the outskirts of Bulaq,
I transcribed with deliberate calligraphy, in a
language I have forgotten, in an alphabet I
know not, the seven voyages of Sindbad and the
story of the City of Brass. In a courtyard of the
prison in Samarkand I often played chess. In
Bikanir I have taught astrology, as I have in
Bohemia. In 1638 I was in Kolzsvar, and later in
Leipzig. In Aberdeen, in 1714, I subscribed to
the six volumes of Pope's Iliad; I know I often
perused them with delight. In 1729 or
thereabouts, I discussed the origin of that poem
with a professor of rhetoric whose name, I
believe, was Giambattista; his arguments struck
me as irrefutable. On October 4,1921, the
Patna, which was taking me to Bombay, ran
aground in a harbor on the Eritrean coast.1
1Part of the ms. is scratched out just here; the
name of the port may have been erased.
I disembarked; there came to my mind other
mornings, long in the past, when I had also
looked out over the Red Sea—when I was a
Roman tribune, and fever and magic and
inactivity consumed the soldiers. Outside the
city I saw a spring; impelled by habit, I tasted
its clear water. As I scaled the steep bank beside
it, a thorny tree scratched the back of my hand.
The unaccustomed pain seemed exceedingly
sharp. Incredulous, speechless, and in joy, I
contemplated the precious formation of a slow 
drop of blood. I am once more mortal, I told
myself over and over, again I am like all other
men. That night, I slept until daybreak.
... A year has passed, and I reread these
pages. I can attest that they do not stray beyond
the bounds of truth, although in the first
chapters, and even in certain paragraphs of
others, I believe I detect a certain falseness.
That is due, perhaps, to an over-employment of
circumstantial details, a way of writing that I
learned from poets; it is a procedure that infects
everything with falseness, since there may be a
wealth of details in the event, yet not in
memory.... I believe, nonetheless, that I have
discovered a more private and inward reason. I
will reveal it; it does not matter that I may be
judged a fantast.
The story I have told seems unreal because
the experiences of two different men are
intermingled in it. In the first chapter, the
horseman wishes to know the name of the river
that runs beside the walls of Thebes; Flaminius
Rufus, who had bestowed upon the city the
epithet "hundred-gated," tells him that the river
is the "Egypt"; neither of those statements
belongs to him, but rather to Homer, who in
the Iliad expressly mentions "Thebes
Hekatompylos" and who in the Odyssey,
through the mouths of Proteus and Ulysses,
invariably calls the Nile the "Egypt." In the
second chapter, when the Roman drinks the
immortal water he speaks a few words in Greek.
Those words are also Homeric; they may be
found at the end of the famous catalog of the
ships. Later, in the dizzying palace, he speaks of
"a reproof that was almost remorse"; those
words, too, belong to Homer, who had foreseen
such a horror. Such anomalies disturbed me;
others, of an aesthetic nature, allowed me to
discover the truth. The clues of this latter type
may be found in the last chapter, which says
that I fought at Stamford Bridge, that in Bulaq I
transcribed the voyages of Sindbad the Sailor,
and that in Aberdeen I subscribed to Pope's
English Iliad.
The text says, inter alia: "In Bikanir I have
taught astrology, as I have in Bohemia." None
of those statements is false; what is significant
is the fact of their having been chosen to record.
The first seems to befit a man of war, but then
one sees that the narrator pays little attention
to the war, much more to the fate of the men.
The "facts" that follow are even more curious. A
dark yet elemental reason led me to put them to
paper: I knew they were pathetic. They are not
pathetic when narrated by the Roman
Flaminius Rufus; they are when narrated by
Homer. It is odd that Homer, in the thirteenth
century, should have copied down the
adventures of Sindbad—another Ulysses—and
again after many hundreds of years have
discovered forms like those of his own Iliad in a
northern kingdom and a barbaric tongue. As for
the sentence that contains the name "Bikanir,"
one can see that it has been composed by a man
of letters desirous (like the author of the catalog
of ships) of wielding splendid words.2
2 Ernesto Sabato suggests that the
"Giambattista" who discussed the origins of the
Iliad with the rare book dealer Cartaphilus is
Giambattista Vico, the Italian who defended the 
argument that Homer is a symbolic character,
like Pluto or Achilles.
As the end approaches, there are no longer
any images from memory— there are only
words. It is not strange that time may have
confused those that once portrayed me with
those that were symbols of the fate of the
person that accompanied me for so many
centuries. I have been Homer; soon, like
Ulysses, I shall be Nobody; soon, I shall be all
men—I shall be dead. 

When the armies clashed at the Battle of
Clontarf, in which the Norwegian was brought
low, the king spoke to his poet and said:
"The brightest deeds lose their luster if they
are not minted in words. I desire you to sing my
victory and my praises. I shall be Æneas; you
shall be my Virgil. Do you believe you have the
gifts worthy of this task I ask of you, which shall
make us both immortal?"
"Yes, great king, I do," answered the poet. "I
am Oían. For twelve winters I have honed my
skills at meter. I know by heart the three
hundred sixty fables which are the foundation
of all true poetry. The Ulster cycle and the
Munster cycle lie within my harp strings. I am
licensed by law to employ the most archaic
words of the language, and its most complex
metaphors. I have mastered the secret script
which guards our art from the prying eyes of the
common folk. I can sing of love, of cattle theft, 
of sailing ships, of war. I know the mythological
lineage of all the royal houses of Ireland. I
possess the secret knowledge of herbs,
astrology, mathematics, and canon law. I have
defeated my rivals in public contest.
I have trained myself in satire, which causes
diseases of the skin, including leprosy. And I
also wield the sword, as I have proven in your
battle. There is but one thing that I do not
know: how to express my thanks for this gift
you make me."
The high king, who was easily wearied by
other men's long speeches, said to the poet with
relief:
"All these things I know full well. I have just
been told that the nightingale has now sung in
England.
When the rains and snow have passed, when
the nightingale has returned from its journey to
the lands of the south, you shall recite your
verses before the court and the Guild of Poets
assembled. I give you one full year. Every letter
and every word, you shall burnish to a fine
gleam. The recompense, as you know, shall not 
be unworthy of my royal wont, nor of the hours
you spend in sleepless inspiration."
"My lord, my greatest recompense is the
sight of your face," said the poet, who was
something of a courtier as well.
He bowed and retired, a verse or two already
beginning to creep into his head.
When the allotted period had passed, a time
filled with plague and rebellion, the panegyric
was sung.
The poet declaimed his verses with slow
assurance, and without a glance at his
manuscript. In the course of it, the king often
nodded approvingly. Everyone imitated his
gesture, even those who, crowding in at the
doors, could not make out a word of it.
At last the king spoke.
"I accept this labor. It is another victory. You
have given to each word its true meaning, to
each noun the epithet bestowed upon it by the
first poets. In all the work there is not an image
which the classics did not employ. War is 'the
fair cloth wov'n of men' and blood is 'sworddrink.' The sea has its god and the clouds
foretell the future. You have marshaled rhyme,
alliteration, assonance, scansion, the artifices of
erudite rhetoric, the wise alternation of meters,
and all with greatest skillfulness. If the whole of
the literature of Ireland should— omen absit—
be lost, well might it all be reconstructed,
without loss, from your classic ode. Thirty
scribes shall transcribe it, twelve times each."
There was a silence. Then the king went on:
"All that is well, and yet nothing has
happened. In our veins the blood has beat no
faster. Our hands have not gone for our bows.
No one's cheeks have paled. No one has
bellowed out a battle cry, no one has stood to
meet the Viking attack. In one year, poet, we
shall gather to applaud another poem. As a sign
of our thanks, take this mirror, which is of
silver."
"I thank you," said the poet, "and I
understand and obey."
The stars of the sky once more journeyed
their bright course. Once more sang the
nightingale in the Saxon forests, and the poet
returned with his scroll—shorter this time than 
before. He did not recite it from memory; he
read it, visibly unsure, omitting certain
passages, as though he himself did not entirely
understand them, or did not wish to profane
them. The verses were strange. They were not a
description of the battle, they were the battle. In
the warlike chaos of the lines there stirred the
God Who Is Three Yet One, the pagan noumena
of Ireland, and those who would war, centuries
after, at the beginning of the Elder Edda. The
poem's form was no less strange. A singular
noun might govern a plural verb. The
prepositions were foreign to common usage.
Harshness vied with sweetness. The metaphors
were arbitrary, or so they seemed.
The king exchanged a few words with the
men of letters assembled about him, and he
spoke in this way:
"Of your first hymn I was able to say that it
was a happy summation of all that has been
written in Ireland.
This poem surpasses all that has gone before,
and obliterates it. It holds one in thrall, it
thrills, it dazzles. 
It will pass over the heads of the ignorant,
and their praises will not be yours, but the
praises of the few, the learned—ah! An ivory
chest shall hold the only copy. From the pen
that has penned such a lofty work, we may
expect one that is more elevated yet...."
Then he added, smiling:
"We are figures in a fable, and it is only right
that we recall that in fables, the number three is
first above all others."
"The three gifts of the wizard, the triads, and
the indubitable Trinity," was all that the poet
dared allow himself to murmur.
The king went on:
"As a token of our thanks, take this mask. It
is of gold."
"I thank you, and I understand and obey,"
the poet said.
The anniversary returned. The palace
sentinels noticed that this time the poet did not
bring a manuscript.
Not without dismay did the king look upon
the poet: he was greatly changed. Something,
which was not simply time, had furrowed and 
transformed his features. His eyes seemed to
stare far into the distance, or to have been
rendered blind. The poet begged to be allowed
to speak to the king. The slaves cleared the hall.
"Have you not composed the ode?" asked the
king.
"I have," said the poet sadly. "Would that
Christ our Lord had forbade it."
"Can you recite it?"
"I dare not."
"I charge you with the courage that you
need," the king declared.
The poet spoke the poem. It was a single line.
Unable to summon the courage to speak it
again aloud, the poet and his king mouthed the
poem, as though it were a secret supplication,
or a blasphemy. The king was no less astounded
and cowed than the poet. The two men, very
pale, looked at each other.
"In the years of my youth," said the king, "I
sailed toward the setting sun. On an island
there, I saw silver greyhounds that hunted
golden boars to their death. On another we
were feted with the fragrance of magic apples. 
On yet another I saw walls of fire. On the
most remote of all, there was a vaulted river
that hung from the sky, and in its waters swam
fish and sailing ships. Those were marvels, but
they do not compare with your poem, which
somehow contains them all. What sorcery has
given you this?"
"At dawn," said this poet, "I awoke speaking
words that at first I did not understand. Those
words are the poem. I felt I had committed
some sin, perhaps that sin which the Holy Spirit
cannot pardon."
"The sin the two of us now share," mused the
king. "The sin of having known Beauty, which is
a gift forbidden mankind. Now we must atone
for it. I gave you a mirror and a golden mask;
here is the third gift, which shall be the last."
He laid in the poet's right hand a dagger.
Of the poet, we know that he killed himself
when he left the palace; of the king, that he is a
beggar who wanders the roads of Ireland, which
once was his kingdom, and that he has never
spoken the poem again. 

That same sweltering morning that Beatriz
Viter bodied, after an imperious confrontation
with her illness in which she had never for an
instant stooped to either sentimentality or fear,
I noticed that a new advertisement for some
cigarettes or other (blondes, I believe they
were) had been posted on the iron billboards of
the Plaza Constitución; the fact deeply grieved
me, for I realized that the vast unceasing
universe was already growing away from her,
and that this change was but the first in an
infinite series. The universe may change, but I
shall not, thought I with melancholy vanity. I
knew that more than once my futile devotion
had exasperated her; now that she was dead, I
could consecrate myself to her memory—
without hope, but also without humiliation. I
reflected that April 30 was her birthday;
stopping by her house on Calle Garay that day
to pay my respects to her father and her first
cousin Carlos Argentino Daneri was an
irreproachable, perhaps essential act of
courtesy. Once again I would wait in the halflight of the little parlor crowded with furniture
and draperies and bric-a-brac, once again I
would study the details of the many
photographs and portraits of her: Beatriz
Viterbo, in profile, in color; Beatriz in a mask at
the Carnival of 1921; Beatriz' first communion;
Beatriz on the day of her wedding to Roberto
Alessandri; Beatriz shortly after the divorce,
lunching at the Jockey Club; Beatriz in
Quilines* with Delia San Marco Porcel and
Carlos Argentino; Beatriz with the Pekinese that
had been a gift from Villegas Haedo; Beatriz in
full-front and in three-quarters view, smiling,
her hand on her chin.... I would not be obliged, 
as I had been on occasions before, to justify my
presence with modest offerings of books—books
whose pages I learned at last to cut, so as not to
find, months later, that they were still intact.
Beatriz Viter bodied in 1929; since then, I
have not allowed an April 30 to pass without
returning to her house. That first time, I arrived
at seven-fifteen and stayed for about twentyfive minutes; each year I would turn up a little
later and stay a little longer; in 1933, a
downpour came to my aid; they were forced to
ask me to dinner. Naturally, I did not let that
fine precedent go to waste; in 1934 I turned up
a few minutes after eight with a lovely
confection from Santa Fe; it was perfectly
natural that I should stay for dinner. And so it
was that on those melancholy and vainly erotic
anniversaries I came to receive the gradual
confidences of Carlos Argentino Daneri.
Beatriz was tall, fragile, very slightly stooped;
in her walk, there was (if I may be pardoned the
oxymoron) something of a graceful clumsiness,
a soupçon of hesitancy, or of palsy; Carlos
Argentinois a pink, substantial, gray-haired 
man of refined features. He holds some sort of
subordinate position in an illegible library in
the outskirts toward the south of the city; he is
authoritarian, though also ineffectual; until very
recently he took advantage of nights and
holidays to remain at home. At two generations'
remove, the Italians and the liberal Italian
gesticulation still survive in him. His mental
activity is constant, passionate, versatile, and
utterly insignificant. He is full of pointless
analogies and idle scruples. He has (as Beatriz
did) large, beautiful, slender hands. For some
months he labored under an obsession for Paul
Fort, less for Fort's ballads than the idea of a
glory that could never be tarnished. "He is the
prince of the poets of la belle France" he would
fatuously say. "You assail him in vain; you shall
never touch him—not even the most venomous
of your darts shall ever touch him."
On April 30, 1941, I took the liberty of
enriching my sweet offering with a bottle of
domestic brandy.
Carlos Argentino tasted it, pronounced it
"interesting," and, after a few snifters, launched 
into an apologia for modern man.
"I picture him," he said with an animation
that was rather unaccountable, "in his study, as
though in the watchtower of a great city,
surrounded by telephones, telegraphs,
phonographs, the latest in radio-telephone and
motion-picture and magic-lantern equipment,
and glossaries and calendars and timetables
and bulletins...."
He observed that for a man so equipped, the
act of traveling was supererogatory; this
twentieth century of ours had upended the fable
of Muhammad and the mountain—mountains
nowadays did in fact come to the modern
Muhammad.
So witless did these ideas strike me as being,
so sweeping and pompous the way they were
expressed, that I associated them immediately
with literature. Why, I asked him, didn't he
write these ideas down?
Predictably, he replied that he already had;
they, and others no less novel, figured large in
the Augural Canto, Prologurial Canto, or simply
Prologue-Canto, of a poem on which he had
been working, with no deafening hurly-burly
and sans reclame, for many years, leaning
always on those twin staffs Work and Solitude.
First he would open the floodgates of the
imagination, then repair to the polishing wheel.
The poem was entitled The Earth; it centered
on a description of our own terraqueous orb
and was graced, of course, with picturesque
digression and elegant apostrophe.
I begged him to read me a passage, even if
only a brief one. He opened a desk drawer, took
out a tall stack of tablet paper stamped with the
letter-head of the Juan Crisóstomo Lafinur
Library,* and read, with ringing selfsatisfaction:
I have seen, as did the Greek, man's cities
and his fame, The works, the days of various
light, the hunger; I prettify no fact, I falsify no
name, For the voyage I narrate is ... autour de
ma chambre.
"A stanza interesting from every point of
view," he said. "The first line wins the kudos of
the learned, the academician, the Hellenist—
though perhaps not that of those would-be 
scholars that make up such a substantial
portion of popular opinion. The second moves
from Homer to Hesiod (implicit homage, at the
very threshold of the dazzling new edifice, to
the father of didactic poetry), not without
revitalizing a technique whose lineage may be
traced to Scripture—that is, enumeration,
congeries, or conglobation.
The third—baroque? decadent? the purified
and fanatical cult of form?— consists of twinned
hemistichs; the fourth, unabashedly bilingual,
assures me the unconditional support of every
spirit able to feel the ample attractions of
playfulness. I shall say nothing of the unusual
rhyme, nor of the erudition that allows me—
without pedantry or boorishness!—to include
within the space of four lines three erudite
allusions spanning thirty centuries of dense
literature: first the Odyssey, second the Works
and Days, and third that immortal bagatelle
that regales us with the diversions of the
Savoyard's plume— Once again, I show my
awareness that truly modern art demands the
balm of laughter, of scherzo. There is no doubt 
about it— Goldoni was right!"
Carlos Argentino read me many another
stanza, all of which earned the same profuse
praise and comment from him. There was
nothing memorable about them; I could not
even judge them to be much worse than the first
one. Application, resignation, and chance had
conspired in their composition; the virtues that
Daneri attributed to them were afterthoughts. I
realized that the poet's work had lain not in the
poetry but in the invention of reasons for
accounting the poetry admirable; naturally, that
later work modified the poem for Daneri, but
not for anyone else. His oral expression was
extravagant; his metrical clumsiness prevented
him, except on a very few occasions, from
transmitting that extravagance to the poem.1
[
1Only once in my lifetime have I had
occasion to examine the fifteen thousand
dodecasyllables of the Polyalbion —that
topographical epic in which Michael Drayton
recorded the fauna, flora, hydrography,
orography, military and monastic history of
England—but I am certain that Drayton's
massive yet limited oeuvre is less tedious than
the vast enterprise conceived and given birth by
Carlos Argentino.]
He proposed to versify the entire planet; by
1941 he had already dispatched several hectares
of the state of Queensland, more than a
kilometer of the course of the Ob, a gasworks
north of Veracruz, the leading commercial
establishments in the parish of Concepción,
Mariana Cambaceres de Alvear's villa on Calle
Once de Setiembre in Belgrano, and a Turkish
bath not far from the famed Brighton
Aquarium. He read me certain laborious
passages from the Australian region of his
poem; his long, formless alexandrines lacked
the relative agitation of the prologue.
I do, however, recall these lines from a satire
in which he lashed out vehemently against bad
poets:
This one fits the poem with a coat of mail
Of erudition; that one, with
gala pomps and circumstance.
Both flail their absurd pennons to no avail,
Neglecting, poor wretches,
the factor sublime—its LOVELINESS! 
It was only out of concern that he might
create an army of implacable and powerful
enemies, he told me, that he did not fearlessly
publish the poem.
Hear this. To the right hand of the routine signpost
(Coming—what need is there to say?—from northnorthwest)
Yawns a bored skeleton—Color? Sky-pearly.—
Outside the sheepfold that suggests an ossuary.
"Two audacious risks!" he exclaimed in
exultation, "snatched from the jaws of disaster,
I can hear you mutter, by success! I admit it, I
admit it. One, the epithet routine, while
making an adjective of a synonym for 'highway,'
nods, en passant, to the inevitable tedium
inherent to those chores of a pastoral and rustic
nature that neither georgics nor our own
belaureled Don Segundo ever dared
acknowledge in such a forthright way, with no
beating about the bush. And the second,
delicately referring to the first, the force-fully
prosaic phrase Yawns a bored skeleton, which
the finicky will want to excommunicate without
benefit of clergy but that the critic of more
manly tastes will embrace as he does his very
life. The entire line, in fact, is a good 24 karats.
The second half-line sets up the most animated
sort of conversation with the reader; it
anticipates his lively curiosity, puts a question
in his mouth, and then ... voilà, answers it... on
the instant. And what do you think of that coup
sky-pearly? The picturesque neologism just
hints at the sky, which is such an important
feature of the Australian landscape. With-out
that allusion, the hues of the sketch would be
altogether too gloomy, and the reader would be
compelled to close the book, his soul deeply
wounded by a black and incurable melancholy."
About midnight, I took my leave.
Two Sundays later, Daneri telephoned me for
what I believe was the first time in his or my
life. He suggested that we meet at four, "to
imbibe the milk of the gods together in the
nearby salon-bar that my estimable land-lords,
Messrs. Zunino and Zungri, have had the rare
commercial foresight to open on the corner. It
is a café you will do well to acquaint yourself
with." I agreed, with more resignation than
enthusiasm, to meet him. It was hard for us to
find a table; the relentlessly modern "salon-bar"
was only slightly less horrendous than I had
expected; at neighboring tables, the excited
clientele discussed the sums invested by Zunino
and Zungri without a second's haggling. Carlos
Argentino pretended to be amazed at some
innovation in the establishment's lighting (an
innovation he'd no doubt been apprised of
beforehand) and then said to me somewhat
severely:
"Much against your inclinations it must be
that you recognize that this place is on a par
with the most elevated heights of Flores."*
Then he reread four or five pages of his poem
to me. Verbal ostentation was the perverse
principle that had guided his revisions: where
he had formerly written "blue" he now had
"azure," "cerulean," and even "bluish." The
word "milky" was not sufficiently hideous for
him; in his impetuous description of a place
where wool was washed, he had replaced it with
"lactine," "lactescent," "lactoreous," "lacteal." ...
He railed bitterly against his critics; then, in a 
more benign tone, he compared them to those
persons "who possess neither precious metals
nor even the steam presses, laminators, and
sulfuric acids needed for minting treasures, but
who can point out to others the precise location
of a treasure." Then he was off on another tack,
inveighing against the obsession for forewords,
what he called "prologomania, " an attitude that
"had already been spoofed in the elegant
preface to the Quixote by the Prince of Wits
himself." He would, however, admit that an
attention-getting recommendation might be a
good idea at the portals of his new work—"an
accolade penned by a writer of stature, of real
import." He added that he was planning to
publish the first cantos of his poem. It was at
that point that I understood the unprecedented
telephone call and the invitation: the man was
about to ask me to write the preface to that
pedantic farrago of his. But my fear turned out
to be unfounded. Carlos Argentino remarked,
with grudging admiration, that he believed he
did not go too far in saying that the prestige
achieved in every sphere by the man of letters
Alvaro Melián Lafinur was "solid," and that if I
could be persuaded to persuade him, Alvaro
"might be enchanted to write the called-for
foreword." In order to forestall the most
unpardonable failure on my part, I was to speak
on behalf of the poem's two incontrovertible
virtues: its formal perfection and its scientific
rigor—"because that broad garden of rhetorical
devices, figures, charms, and graces will not
tolerate a single detail that does not accord with
its severe truthfulness." He added that Beatriz
had always enjoyed Alvaro's company.
I agreed, I agreed most profusely. I did,
however, for the sake of added plausibility,
make it clear that I wouldn't be speaking with
Alvaro on Monday but rather on Thursday, at
the little supper that crowned each meeting of
the Writers Circle. (There are no such suppers,
although it is quite true that the meetings are
held on Thursday, a fact that Carlos Argentino
might verify in the newspapers and that lent a
certain credence to my contention.) I told him
(half-prophetically, half-farsightedly) that
before broaching the subject of the prologue, I 
would describe the curious design of the poem.
We said our good-byes; as I turned down Calle
Bernardo de Irigoyen, I contemplated as
impartially as I could the futures that were left
to me: (a) speak with Alvaro and tell him that
that first cousin of Beatriz' (the explanatory
circumlocution would allow me to speak her
name) had written a poem that seemed to draw
out to infinity the possibilities of cacophony and
chaos; (b) not speak with Alvaro. Knowing
myself pretty well, I foresaw that my indolence
would opt for (b).
From early Friday morning on, the telephone
was a constant source of anxiety. I was
indignant that this instrument from which
Beatriz' irrecoverable voice had once emerged
might now be reduced to transmitting the futile and perhaps angry complaints of that selfdeluding Carlos Argentino Daneri.
Fortunately, nothing came of it—save the
inevitable irritation inspired by a man who had
charged me with a delicate mission and then
forgotten all about me.
Eventually the telephone lost its terrors, but 
in late October Carlos Argentino did call me. He
was very upset; at first I didn't recognize his
voice. Dejectedly and angrily he stammered out
that that now unstoppable pair Zunino and
Zungri, under the pretext of expanding their
already enormous "café" were going to tear
down his house.
"The home of my parents—the home where I
was born—the old and deeply rooted house on
Calle Garay!" he repeated, perhaps drowning
his grief in the melodiousness of the phrase.
It was not difficult for me to share his grief.
After forty, every change becomes a hateful
symbol of time's passing; in addition, this was a
house that I saw as alluding infinitely to Beatriz.
I tried to make that extremely delicate point
clear; my interlocutor cut me off. He said that if
Zunino and Zungri persisted in their absurd
plans, then Zunni, his attorney, would sue them
ipso facto for damages, and force them to part
with a good hundred thousand for his trouble.
Zunni's name impressed me; his law firm, on
the corner of Caseros and Tacuari, is one of
proverbial sobriety. I inquired whether Zunni
had already taken the case. Daneri said he'd be
speaking with him that afternoon; then he
hesitated, and in that flat, impersonal voice we
drop into when we wish to confide something
very private, he said he had to have the house so
he could finish the poem—because in one
corner of the cellar there was an Aleph. He
explained that an Aleph is one of the points in
space that contain all points.
"It's right under the dining room, in the
cellar," he explained. In his distress, his words
fairly tumbled out.
“It's mine, it's mine; I discovered it in my
childhood, before I ever attended school. The
cellar stairway is steep, and my aunt and uncle
had forbidden me to go down it, but somebody
said you could go around the world with that
thing down there in the basement. The person,
whoever it was, was referring, I later learned, to
a steamer trunk, but I thought there was some
magical contraption down there. I tried to
sneak down the stairs, fell head over heels, and
when I opened my eyes, I saw the Aleph."
" The Aleph?" I repeated. 
"Yes, the place where, without admixture or
confusion, all the places of the world, seen from
every angle, coexist. I revealed my discovery to
no one, but I did return. The child could not
understand that he was given that privilege so
that the man might carve out a poem! Zunino
and Zungri shall never take it from me—never,
never! Lawbook in hand, Zunni will prove that
my Aleph is inalienable."
I tried to think.
"But isn't the cellar quite dark?"
"Truth will not penetrate a recalcitrant
understanding. If all the places of the world are
within the Aleph, there too will be all stars, all
lamps, all sources of light."
"I'll be right over. I want to see it."
I hung up before he could tell me not to
come. Sometimes learning a fact is enough to
make an entire series of corroborating details,
previously unrecognized, fall into place; I was
amazed that I hadn't realized until that moment
that Carlos Argentino was a madman. All the
Viterbos, in fact—Beatriz (I myself have said
this many times) was a woman, a girl of
implacable clear-sightedness, but there were
things about her—oversights, distractions,
moments of contempt, downright cruelty—that
perhaps could have done with a pathological
explanation. Carlos Argentine's madness filled
me with malign happiness; deep down, we had
always detested one another.
On Calle Garay, the maid asked me to be so
kind as to wait—Sr. Daneri was in the cellar, as
he always was, developing photographs. Beside
the flowerless vase atop the useless piano
smiled the great faded photograph of Beatriz,
not so much anachronistic as outside time. No
one could see us; in a desperation of tenderness
I approached the portrait.
"Beatriz, Beatriz Elena, Beatriz Elena
Viterbo," I said. "Beloved Beatriz, Beatriz lost
forever—it's me, it's me, Borges."
Carlos came in shortly afterward. His words
were laconic, his tone indifferent; I realized that
he was unable to think of anything but the loss
of the Aleph.
"A glass of pseudo-cognac," he said, "and
we'll duck right into the cellar. I must forewarn 
you: dorsal decubitus is essential, as are
darkness, immobility, and a certain ocular
accommodation. You'll lie on the tile floor and
fix your eyes on the nineteenth step of the
pertinent stairway. I'll re-ascend the stairs, let
down the trap door, and you'll be alone. Some
rodent will frighten you—easy enough to do!
Within a few minutes, you will see the Aleph.
The microcosm of the alchemists and
Kabbalists, our proverbial friend the multum in
parvo, made flesh!
"Of course," he added, in the dining room, "if
you don't see it, that doesn't invalidate anything
I've told you.... Go on down; within a very short
while you will be able to begin a dialogue with
all the images of Beatriz."
I descended quickly, sick of his vapid chatter.
The cellar, barely wider than the stairway, was
more like a well or cistern. In vain my eyes
sought the trunk that Carlos Argentino had
mentioned. A few burlap bags and some crates
full of bottles cluttered one corner. Carlos
picked up one of the bags, folded it, and laid it
out very precisely. 
"The couch is a humble one," he explained,
"but if I raise it one inch higher, you'll not see a
thing, and you'll be cast down and dejected.
Stretch that great clumsy body of yours out on
the floor and count up nineteen steps."
